

>> My name is Alyssa Gallagher [assumed spelling] and I work in the Office of Communications and Education at the National Cancer Institute. I'm back today with doctors David Nelson and Brad Hesse to address your questions from the Making Data Talk Cyber Seminar held on January 26, 2010. During the seminar, Drs. Nelson and Hesse highlighted key points and concepts from Making Data Talk, a book that they co-authored along with Dr. Bob Croyle. Thank you both for joining us again for this follow-up discussion. We want to thank all of the cyber seminar participants who submitted some very thought provoking questions for our authors. We'll get to all of those during our podcast, but first let me start by asking "What prompted or inspired you to write this book?" 

>> Dr. David E. Nelson: I think the reason I wrote it was I had done a lot of work in trying to present data. I used to run a major data system for the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention and thought, "Well there must be something out there to help people who need to communicate data to lay audiences in a more effective fashion." What I discovered was that there were pieces of information out there. There was information about how to visualize data. But nobody had tried to pull things together in a broad, practical process by which data needed to be communicated more effectively. And also thinking about, "Gee, were there times when it wasn't such a good idea to communicate data?" So that was the fundamental reason for writing the book. 

>> Dr. Bradford W. Hesse: So if I could mention, Dave reached out to me when we started this process and I had spent most of my career trying to figure out how people might use something like a user interface on a computer. And when they were doing that, I know that with the internet a lot of folks were getting very confused about data presentations. So they would go on to our site at the NCI for example, and they would look at SEER data: that kind of thing. And I thought, "Boy, there's got to be a better way of helping people design something like user interfaces on websites." And for that matter, even the reports that we do out of agencies so that they're just easier to understand. So I glommed on to Dave's wonderful ideas and that's how I think I got involved in it and I think what kept us going over the past several years. 

>> Great. Now we've kind of tried to break the questions down according to the learning objectives that were mentioned in the presentation. So the first couple speak to the understanding of the fundamentals of communication in relation to presenting data. So one of our first questions from our participant in the cyber seminar is, "Do you have any advice for the lay person interviewing physicians and communicating medical information to the public?" 

>> Dr. David E. Nelson: I do. I think that the essence of the book - the principles - really do apply across audiences and apply every bit as much to the healthcare setting and working with physicians as they did with anybody else. And I think the benefit of working with physicians in individual offices and things is there's an opportunity for much more dialog and opportunity for a 2-way communication feedback to get an understanding of what information is needed, how people would like to get it. For example, there really are people who don't want data or numbers or they're scared by them. There's an opportunity to ask them one on one, "Would you like some information in the form of numbers?" If the answer is no, then being able to honor that request. I think there's also an opportunity to provide a lot more contextual information and opportunity to deal with some of the emotions that can occur in a one on one setting because it's one thing to talk about public health data and numbers more broadly for a population. It's another thing if it's an individual and they're having to deal with their own healthcare situation. Maybe they have to make a major decision in their life about whether to do or not do for example, or have surgery or take some sort of type of medication. So I think in summary, the main thing is that it's the same -- the same principles apply. I think there's just much more opportunity for more explanation in a 2-way conversation. 

>> Dr. Bradford W. Hesse: I guess we'll both do this. We'll kind of tag team a little bit on each of the questions and I'll add a little bit as well. In this case, something that strikes is the difference in what happens when we communicate something like oh mammography screening guidelines that happened last fall: something that's near and dear to all of us thinking about this. And how the context sort of varies at a large population level to what happens at individual levels. So where you're talking to a physician, often you're talking to a physician at an individual level. If you want to go and convey what that physician is telling you out to other people - which is I think part of this question - then it might be that the risk here is that we focus a little bit too much on anecdote, right? We want to be sure that we understand from the physician's perspective sort of what the public health data are really telling us. So you could ask questions like, "Alright, well what does this mean for the majority of patients?" Not just "What does this mean for an individual patient?" Or, "Tell me a little bit about guidelines that the professional organization might espouse." That kind of thing. And that's a way of just sort of overcoming that little glitch sometimes in the way we communicate data. 

>> Great. Another interesting question is, "How might an anthropologist working in health policy apply the methods you discussed?" 

>> Dr. David E. Nelson: I will just drop back to what I said previously in the sense of the same principles we talked about applying to an anthropologist as they would to anybody else. I think an anthropologist would have the benefit of in some ways much more in depth understanding of populations and groups that they work with. The essence of anthropology I think is really understanding a culture or a subculture. And again, this provides the opportunity to really understand what people understand about an issue, whether they're data files. That is, people who are more interested in numbers and whether that's appropriate or not. And following up what Brad said, there always is the danger of the anecdote. So health policy discussions often times can devolve sort of speak down to one sound byte or one particular story. And I think an anthropologist working in health policy has an opportunity again to provide much more contextual information about what members mean and how that might be applied in thinking about populations more broadly. 

>> Dr. Bradford W. Hesse: So okay, I agree a hundred percent. That's exactly what an anthropologist does really well. You know there was a colleague of mine that unfortunately we lost in the past 6 months to lung cancer, but she was anthropologist and very active in the community. And she used to come in a talk to me and say, "You know what? I think you guys - meaning scientists - you're my tribe. I really like understanding your culture and I like figuring out how to explain you to other cultures." So it's what Dave kind of alluded to. This is what anthropologists do best actually is help us kind of think about how to communicate data from 1 set of rules over to another set where people can really understand it. I might also mention that there are places where anthropologists have contributed substantially in methods for testing and integrating. So in medical anthropology for example and contextual inquiry, we're getting a lot of cues on how to provide that sort of context that Dave was talking about and that's very useful. 

>> Great, thank you. The next question was a little bit hard to categorize but it would probably fall under the list general considerations when selecting and presenting data or in this particular case, in ownership and storage of data. So the question is, "Who should have ownership of data and what process should be in placed to address issues of sharing data and how to store data?" 

>> Dr. David E. Nelson: Well I will have to admit that, that goes beyond what we were talking about in our session about how to select and present data more effectively. These are really important issues however about issues about confidentiality and ownership and sharing and again, they're very important and who own them and how they get out more widely I think is an issue for others to deal with. I will say however something that's a philosophical perspective which is I think that data need to be getting out there as widely as possible as long as they're communicated well. I believe that particularly that people should have access to data. I'm personally not as worried about people taking data and misusing it as the fact they don't have access to some of the basic information and I think one of our roles as public health professionals and scientists and others is to help people to understand data better. 

>> Dr. Bradford W. Hesse: I'll say I agree with that Dave. And this question is such an important question; it sort of touches just the tip of a big iceberg these days. So I think it's fair to say that NIH there are a lot of discussions about who owns data: especially data collected with public dollars. And I think Dave and I both come from the background at NIH that we believe that the results from these kinds of data should be shared for the public good. And for the most part, we're pushing transparency. That's a lot of what the book is about. But that means there's a responsibility along with that too and that means that we have to get the mechanisms in place that are going to protect privacy, that the identifier data at the appropriate spots and to present access to the results in a way that aren't confusing. Just as a little reference for folks: at the National Cancer Institute, we have a lot of work going on in some of the area of supporting data through the Cancer Biomedical Informatics grid. And it might be useful just to Google that and see if you can find some information about what's happening in terms of protecting privacy and sharing and that kind of thing. 

>> The next couple questions fall under the learning objective, describe visual and other modes for presenting data and engaging in effective ways. The first question comes from a participant in the cyber seminar who wants to know, they were taught to never include both red and green on a graphic because 7 to 10 percent of the male population in the U.S. is color blind. In your opinion, should this be a general rule or only taken into consideration if you are presenting data on a predominantly male problem such as prostate cancer? 

>> Dr. Bradford W. Hesse: So yeah when my wife sees me often, she'll probably say it's more than 7 to 10 percent are color blind. But in answer to the question, I really, firmly fall down on the side of universal design. So that means that it should be a general rule: not a specific rule just for specific populations. Especially as we design reports that we know are getting circulated in the very broadly these days. And there are wonderful examples of tools that are available through the web. There's one at http - I'll give you a website - colon, forward slash, forward slash, www dot color brewer - c,o,l,o,r,b,r,e,w,e,r, dot org. www.Colorbrewer.org. And this is the -- brewer is actually the name of the researcher that's put this together. And it provides some guidelines and some help tools to sort of bring colors together in a way that we know we're protecting all parts of the population. Those that are color blind and also recognizes that often our color charts are going to get photocopied into black and white. So it will give us a bit of a resource on how to say, "This transfers well into black and white." So that's good. So that's one thing I would say. There's one other thing I'd like to say though as well and that is that from most of what we've read in terms of good usability guidelines for the web and presentation guidelines for reports, one rule of thumb is to never rely solely on colors that convey information. So we're firm believers in providing good text labels into the visual as well and data on the chart itself. And you'll see that up at usability guidelines online as well. 

>> Dr. David E. Nelson: I think the only thing I would add to what Brad said is that there really are some cultural uses of color and so red and green in the United States can convey certain things. Red can convey danger: red alert or red light for stop signs. So there are times where that's out there. But realize that color choices are not necessarily trans-cultural. So for example in China, red conveys happiness. Green is another example conveys often times financial issues, money or ecological issues and things like. So certainly there are times in communicating where the use of those colors could certainly be appropriate or helpful. Perhaps showing a dollar sign: that'd obviously be green and things like that. But I do think that Brad's recommendations about following general guidelines makes a lot of sense and that generally red and green should be -- if they need to be used, should be used sparingly and in certain contextual situations. 

>> Thank you. So moving on from color to slide templates. Do you guys have any recommendations for slide templates such as the U.S. State Specific Map example that can be downloaded and modified depending upon the audience or the type of data? 

>> Dr. Bradford W. Hesse: Well there's one resource that we found provided by the U.S.G.S. when it comes to mapping and that kind of thing. And if you go to www.geodata, so it's g,e,o,d,a,t,a dot gov. www.geodata.gov. It's a whole architecture set up to help people create better maps. And so there are a lot of useful templates up there and ways of creating data on the fly that could be put into a map in compelling ways. I can't attest to everything that's on there but there is -- it's a good resource. The other problem though that I think that Dave and I have encountered is that when it comes to using kind of can templates for slide presentations - let's say from PowerPoint - we know that often those slide templates undo the purpose and task of the communicator. They actually work against the purpose and task of the communicator. So I think I want to put a big, big caveat when it comes to over relying on these kinds of templates. So an example of that is many of these slides are just surrounded by what Tufte called "chart junk." And it's meant to brand and it's meant to make it very difficult actually to find out what's going on. There was a wonderful paper that Tufte wrote called -- that was about PowerPoint actually and how it can lead presenters down very dangerous paths. So I just want to caution folks on slides. And then I guess the last thing is I'll look to my colleagues here in the Office of Communication and Education, it might be that we've just gotten a very good example of a need out there that we could take under advisement. Maybe we could create better examples of templates that we can hand out to people on cancer control. [Inaudible] we all learn how to do this well. 

>> That's a very good point. 

>> Dr. David E. Nelson: And I will just second what Brad mentioned here particularly about some of the challenges of the defaults in PowerPoint and this is not meant to be singling out one program, but I find my experiences in trying to present data from sample figures or charts and tables, I often find myself using Excel which is another Microsoft product in creating things in the Microsoft Excel and importing them in to a blank PowerPoint slide because I can find -- I find that I'm able to make a lot more adjustments and do things and I think better presentation style than I could ever do out of the defaults in PowerPoint. 

>> Great, very good information. So the last question we have from our cyber seminar participants is how do you engage people who don't believe there is a problem and want you - an agency or a communicator - just to go away? 

>> Dr. Bradford W. Hesse: Yeah, that's a good one. So I think and in a preface Dave talked about this a little bit in the book: what our ethical obligations are. And first and foremost when all is said and done, we recognize that people have choice. And they have different frames of reference and different epistemologies. And you know some people probably aren't going to want to hear too much data. And there's certain times in their lives when they don't want to hear about too much data and we have to respect that. So I think I'm going to preface what I say by saying that you know we can't possibly use all of the data to persuade all people all the time. It's just not going to happen and we have to accept that. But, beyond that I think the reason why we wrote the book is that we think we can have a greater influence on a greater number of people. And if we choose to communicate data clearly and if we show real respect for people's needs, so that's why we wrote the book. And within the book there are a lot of suggestions for how to take what otherwise might have been a jargon filled dry presentation of data: one that maybe even distracted the individual who needed some information. And eventually would have turned off that individual. We wanted to turn that around to say, "Here's how we can make these things a little bit more user friendly." And if we do that, our ultimate goal is to create a culture where data are valued. 

>> Dr. David E. Nelson: I do think that there are people whose minds are closed about particular issues and particular topics. I feel like I'm related to several people like that in my own personal life. I think the -- I did talk about this a little bit in the presentation about confirmation biases, elective exposure. So there are people who don't want to hear what we have to say and [inaudible]. We're not here to force things down people's brains so to speak. My own reading of the literature however is that if you have people whose minds are just not open to certain things, the reality is that probably the best way to reach them is with an individual's personal story. Now there are problems with anecdotes that are legion. However, to just try to engage somebody in a conversation about an issue that they may not want to hear about -- global warming comes to mind as something that there's certainly some people -- but there are many others in related public health that fit this category. And I do think that somebody's personal story about their experiences are probably the only way I can think of. It gets around some of those natural defenses people have. If anything can get around that, these are the things. It's harder to simply deny somebody's personal experience and story -- not that some people can't do that anyway but to be aware that I don't believe that numbers or a nice chart or something necessarily does that. So I think that would be my recommendation on that. 

>> Alright, I would like to thank everybody again who submitted questions and I also want to thank our authors Drs Nelson and Hesse again for being here with us to answer all of them. And you know, I guess to summarize and to close what impacts do you hope this book will have? I know we've discussed a few things already but if you'd want to summarize, what do you hope to see [inaudible]? 

>> Dr. David E. Nelson: I'll keep this short. I think the thing to realize that data are a form -- a way of communicating information in the bigger context. I think historically what happens is a lot of people work in the data world, have data and they want audiences to see their data and do something with it. And I think the essence that this book that we wanted people to use more effectively is that data are a way of communicating information but you have to figure out what it is you want them to understand at a bigger issue. And decide whether or not data are needed or not and if so, what you select and that you think very carefully about the selection process in conjunction with who the audience is and how to present it and do it in an effective way. And I think also to do some planning about it. The opt in model which we talk about that I credit Brad for coming up with, I think provides a very, very useful framework for even just a simple one on one conversation at one level all the way to an international campaign. Provides ways for people to think about data in a bigger picture and to do it a bit more effectively than just throwing things out in a table or throwing a chart and thinking that somehow that mistakenly that data will speak for themselves. 

>> Dr. Bradford W. Hesse: And I boy I agree with all of that. Those are my hopes as well. And I guess to sum it all up for me, I especially would like to see a world and a culture which we sort of value data again. And that means that we make our decisions based on really what evidence is telling us and not just [inaudible] sorts of stories and anecdotes and all that. And that's going to take some responsibility from all of us to sort of graph that new world. 

>> Well thanks again. Is there any other closing remarks? Anything else you guys would like to mention? 

>> Just how much we appreciated this opportunity I think to talk to folks who have cared about this book because we certainly cared about it. 

>> Alright, thank you very much. 

==== Transcribed by Automatic Sync Technologies ====
